---
title: "Coding with an Accent"
---

Here is one little tip you might not know: programming languages, like
spoken languages, have accents.

-MORE-

Well, maybe I’m stretching the metaphor a bit. But only a bit. So bear
with me while I dissert a bit about spoken languages. I promise it won’t
take too long.

A brief detour on Spoken Languages
----------------------------------

I was born in the southern part of Spain. That region, known as
Andalusia, has it’s own accent. It has a distinct intonation has certain
slang, but its most prominent characteristic is the omission of
phonemes. I guess, to other Spanish speakers, Andalusian Spanish sounds
like a mixture of Scottish and Texas English. It is also kindof
considered “funny by default”. Some comediants use that accent to tell
jokes, even if they don’t usually speak like that.

In addition to Andalusian, after spending 9 years in Madrid, I have a
separate “compartment” in my head for Madrid’s accent, which we could
call “neutral Spanish”. I change between Andalusian and neutral
depending on who I am speaking to.

I also speak English and French. I only have one accent for each of
those, but I know them well enough to notice how different accents
sound.

This linguistic background has allowed me to notice certain …
differences here and there. Besides the obvious ones, like phonetical or
grammatical rules, I mean; more of the semantic kind.

For example, French people (at least people from Paris, which are the
ones I’m more familiar with) don’t even say “we”. I mean, they have a
word for it - “nous”. But they never use it when colloquially speaking.
Instead, they use the impersonal “on”, which roughtly translates to “it”
(as in “It is said that…”). So, when they mean “let’s go shopping” they
say something like “it should go shopping”. Crazy, right? Well, they do
it all the time.

What can I say about English? It is so widely used that there are so
many things one can say. By hearing how they pronnouce the letter “r”,
one can say whether someone is from one side or the other of the
Atlantic. I wonder if some day “I wanna go” will be considered valid
English.

In Spain, no one says good-bye any more. There is a word for it, of
course - “Adiós”. But no one says it. Everyone says “see you soon”
instead. Even if it’s longer. Society has decided that “Adiós” is too …
hard, I suppose.

They say eskimos have 7 different words for “snow”. I don’t know if it’s
true. I know that my girlfriend, who grew in the northern part of Spain,
has 1 more word than me for saying “it rains”, in Spanish.

The Engineer View
-----------------

I like to think that all men of science share a special sense of beauty.
Instead of (or in addition to) being able to find beauty in a work of
art, we find it in efficient, neatly organized systems and tools.

When I look at spoken languages from the point of view of an engineer, I
find them a bit … lacking. Spoken languages are not a very efficient
tool for communicating concepts. They require more effort than it’s
really necessary.

Spanish verbs are crazily ornated. English does it better, but still
requires too much memory - why say “I am, you are, he is”, when you
could say “I be, you be, he be”?. Speaking of English, its
pronnounciation rules have too many exceptions and things that one has
to remember - tomato vs potato. That one is much simpler in Spanish. My
biggest grip with French is that even if lots of words are pronnounced
the same way, they are written differently. The fact that the word
“bureaucracy” has its roots on that particular language makes a lot of
sense.

Programming languages as tools
------------------------------

When I look at programming languages, I conserve that sense of beauty.
That is why I consider myself very fortunate to be able to work with a
programming language that I find aesthetically pleasant as an engineer.
I enjoy using the language, and seeing where it takes me.

Lua is another language that I enjoy. It is smaller than ruby, and
certainly less powerful, but the compromises it makes reflect what I
think an embedded language should do.

Javascript is so ubiquous it hurts!

And of course there are plenty of others. Lisp. Haskell. Erlang. Html.
Even CSS.

And yet, my sense of beauty is never satisfied. Ruby, which is my
favourite, is slow in some cases. The way it handles blocks troubles me.
Lua has implicit global variables, and its string manipulation library
is too barebones. Javascript … well, I used to enjoy it. After reading
[Javascript: the good
parts](http://www.amazon.com/JavaScript-Good-Parts-Douglas-Crockford/dp/0596517742)
, however, I can’t help but keep noticing the bad parts. Lisp doesn’t
feel like a language, it feels like raw
[AST](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstract_syntax_tree) manipulation.
PHP… don’t get me started on PHP.

The point is, I have grudges with all of them. It would seem that I am
doomed to never be satisfied.

The accent in programming languages
-----------------------------------

But I wanted to talk about the accent in programming languages. As I was
saying before, I think that there are “semantic differences” between
spoken languages. And I think those differences are even more
pronnounced in programming languages.

The first programming language I ever learnt was BASIC, in the mighty
[Spectrum 48k+](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ZX_Spectrum#ZX_Spectrum.2B)
. Much later, in the University, I learnt C. And I programmed C exactly
like I programmed BASIC before. Then I learnt Java … and yet, I managed
to program it as if it was BASIC. Only though time, and gradual effort,
I managed to “get” this new “way of thinking” called “Object
orientation”.

… and then I started to do Object Orientation in plain C. Which was a
mistake.

I’ve needed a lot of time to realize that every programming language has
its strenghts; and they are often not easily “exportable”. This is what
I call the “nature” of a language. This “nature” is not necessarily
related with the language’s grammar rules. For example, Javascript has
acquired an “asyncronous nature” recently, thanks to
[node.js](http://nodejs.org) .

To get the nature of a programming language, you probably should not use
a grammar book. You will need a book which concentrates on “idiomatic
rules” instead. Or, you could spend an inordinate amount of time reading
other people’s code.

So, when you learn your next programming language, don’t stop after you
learn the basic grammar rules. Try to concentrate on whether people say
“Adiós” with it. Or how many ways it has for saying “snow”.
